Energy 313 (2024) 134030

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/energy

BMSFormer: An efficient deep learning model for online state-of-health
estimation of lithium-ion batteries under high-frequency early SOC data
with strong correlated single health indicator
Xiaopeng Li a , Minghang Zhao a,c,*, Shisheng Zhong a,b,c , Junfu Li d, Song Fu b, Zhiqi Yan e
a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China
School of Mechatronics Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150000, China
Weihai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Operation and Maintenance, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China
d
School of Automotive Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China
e
College of Aeronautical Engineering, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin, 300300, China
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling editor: Prof X Ou

The efficient and accurate state-of-health (SOH) estimation is crucial for reducing risks and ensuring effective
application in battery management systems (BMS) of resource-limited devices. However, many recent state-ofthe-art SOH estimation approaches rely on resource-consuming structures to obtain good performance. In this
paper, an efficient deep learning model for SOH estimation, namely BMSFormer, is constructed. BMSFormer
mainly integrates a Local-Global Fusion Attention module to capture both long-term and short-term de­
pendencies while reducing computational complexity compared to traditional Softmax-based attention. Addi­
tionally, two kinds of depthwise separable convolution are embedded to fuse multi-scale and multi-channel
features, enhancing feature diversity with fewer parameters than standard convolution. Three widely used
battery datasets, each with different chemistries and operating conditions, are employed to evaluate the per­
formance of BMSFormer. The experiments results illustrate that the proposed model achieves higher accuracy,
lower computational consumption, and stabler performance across various hyperparameter combinations
compared to alternative models.

Keywords:
State of health
Lithium-ion batteries
Efficiency estimation
Local-global fusion attention
Depthwise feature fusion

1. Introduction
Nowadays, with the advantages of high energy density, low selfdischarge rate and long service life, lithium-ion batteries have become
one of the main energy storage devices in civil airlines, electric vehicles,
mobile devices, aerospace and other domains [1]. Although, lithium-ion
batteries bring convenience to people’s lives, they also pose latent safety
hazards. These hazards primarily arise from the complicated degrada­
tion processes brought by complex internal chemical structure, different
working conditions and environment. Therefore, precise monitoring and
state estimation are essential to enhance battery safety, reliability, and
performance.
As an essential guard of battery safe and efficient operation, battery
management system (BMS) can record real-time data, manage cell bal­
ance, estimate internal status and provide emergency protection [2–4].
The internal states, such as state-of-health (SOH), cannot be measured

directly. At the same time, due to the limited storage space of embedded
devices, they often rely on online estimations using simple approaches,
such as Kalman filter (KF) and its variants [5–7], classical physical
models [8], equivalent circuit models (ECM) [9] and traditional ma­
chine learning (ML) algorithms like support vector machines (SVM) [10]
and random forest (RF) [11]. However, on one hand, when faced with
nonlinear and unstable data from online monitoring and historical cy­
cles, traditional models struggle to provide high performance due to
their structural constraints [12,13]; On the other hand,
high-performance deep models are generally not feasible enough for
convenient deployment on BMS due to their computationally expensive
structures. Actually, since the emergence of AlexNet [14], the predom­
inant trend in model architecture has been towards increasing depth and
size, but many real-world applications need to be performed in real-time
and/or on limited resource mobile devices [15]. Thereby, the
high-performance deep models have a certain demand to be compact

* Corresponding author. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China.
E-mail address: zhaomh@hit.edu.cn (M. Zhao).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2024.134030
Received 27 September 2024; Received in revised form 15 November 2024; Accepted 27 November 2024
Available online 30 November 2024
0360-5442/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

