Energy 313 (2024) 134030

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/energy

BMSFormer: An efficient deep learning model for online state-of-health
estimation of lithium-ion batteries under high-frequency early SOC data
with strong correlated single health indicator
Xiaopeng Li a , Minghang Zhao a,c,*, Shisheng Zhong a,b,c , Junfu Li d, Song Fu b, Zhiqi Yan e
a

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China
School of Mechatronics Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150000, China
Weihai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Operation and Maintenance, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China
d
School of Automotive Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China
e
College of Aeronautical Engineering, Civil Aviation University of China, Tianjin, 300300, China
b
c

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Handling editor: Prof X Ou

The efficient and accurate state-of-health (SOH) estimation is crucial for reducing risks and ensuring effective
application in battery management systems (BMS) of resource-limited devices. However, many recent state-ofthe-art SOH estimation approaches rely on resource-consuming structures to obtain good performance. In this
paper, an efficient deep learning model for SOH estimation, namely BMSFormer, is constructed. BMSFormer
mainly integrates a Local-Global Fusion Attention module to capture both long-term and short-term de­
pendencies while reducing computational complexity compared to traditional Softmax-based attention. Addi­
tionally, two kinds of depthwise separable convolution are embedded to fuse multi-scale and multi-channel
features, enhancing feature diversity with fewer parameters than standard convolution. Three widely used
battery datasets, each with different chemistries and operating conditions, are employed to evaluate the per­
formance of BMSFormer. The experiments results illustrate that the proposed model achieves higher accuracy,
lower computational consumption, and stabler performance across various hyperparameter combinations
compared to alternative models.

Keywords:
State of health
Lithium-ion batteries
Efficiency estimation
Local-global fusion attention
Depthwise feature fusion

1. Introduction
Nowadays, with the advantages of high energy density, low selfdischarge rate and long service life, lithium-ion batteries have become
one of the main energy storage devices in civil airlines, electric vehicles,
mobile devices, aerospace and other domains [1]. Although, lithium-ion
batteries bring convenience to people’s lives, they also pose latent safety
hazards. These hazards primarily arise from the complicated degrada­
tion processes brought by complex internal chemical structure, different
working conditions and environment. Therefore, precise monitoring and
state estimation are essential to enhance battery safety, reliability, and
performance.
As an essential guard of battery safe and efficient operation, battery
management system (BMS) can record real-time data, manage cell bal­
ance, estimate internal status and provide emergency protection [2–4].
The internal states, such as state-of-health (SOH), cannot be measured

directly. At the same time, due to the limited storage space of embedded
devices, they often rely on online estimations using simple approaches,
such as Kalman filter (KF) and its variants [5–7], classical physical
models [8], equivalent circuit models (ECM) [9] and traditional ma­
chine learning (ML) algorithms like support vector machines (SVM) [10]
and random forest (RF) [11]. However, on one hand, when faced with
nonlinear and unstable data from online monitoring and historical cy­
cles, traditional models struggle to provide high performance due to
their structural constraints [12,13]; On the other hand,
high-performance deep models are generally not feasible enough for
convenient deployment on BMS due to their computationally expensive
structures. Actually, since the emergence of AlexNet [14], the predom­
inant trend in model architecture has been towards increasing depth and
size, but many real-world applications need to be performed in real-time
and/or on limited resource mobile devices [15]. Thereby, the
high-performance deep models have a certain demand to be compact

* Corresponding author. Department of Mechanical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, Shandong, 264209, China.
E-mail address: zhaomh@hit.edu.cn (M. Zhao).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2024.134030
Received 27 September 2024; Received in revised form 15 November 2024; Accepted 27 November 2024
Available online 30 November 2024
0360-5442/© 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

X. Li et al.

Energy 313 (2024) 134030

and exhibit low computational cost for practical applications in the
future.
The recent SOH estimation approaches could be divided into two
main categories: (1) model-based approaches, including electrochemical
models and empirical models, (2) data-driven approaches, including
machine learning and deep learning methods [16–19].

a self-attention mechanism to capture global dependencies between
input and output. Due to its significant advantage in parallel computing
and global modeling, Transformer has already achieved immense suc­
cess across multiple domains [39–41]. Since Hannan et al. [42] applied
the Transformer to estimate SOH of batteries in 2021, subsequent
models have tended to increase in complexity. For instance, Gomez et al.
[43] introduced an improved temporal fusion Transformer, integrating a
Bi-LSTM encoder-decoder layer to enhance performance. Jia et al. [44]
proposed a hybrid prediction model by combining bidirectional gated
recurrent unit and Transformer. In another study, Gu et al. [45] sug­
gested a novel approach using data pre-processing methods and a
CNN-Transformer framework. Bai et al. [46] introduced a
2D-CNN-Transformer model using matrixing data, while Chen et al. [47]
applied a vision-Transformer network (VIT) for SOH estimation,
involving extra data flattening operations. Most existing methods do not
attempt to simplify the structures of the Transformer-based networks,
instead, they integrated it directly with other modules or models,
resulting in computationally complicated approaches.
Three main problems faced by many recent approaches for battery
SOH estimation, can be summarized as follows.

(1) Model-based approaches simulate the electrochemical principles
in batteries using mathematical equations or circuit components
[20]. Electrochemical models (e.g., single-particle model and
pseudo-two-dimensional model) utilize a series of differential
equations to represent the electrochemical reaction processes in
the battery. While these models may offer high accuracy, they
often require extensive computational resources, making online
estimation challenging; and many parameters, such as particle
radius and diffusion coefficients, are difficult to obtain [21,22].
In contrast, as a widely employed empirical model, equivalent
circuit model (ECM), simulates battery internal behavior with
circuit components such as resistors and capacitors [9,23]. ECMs
(e.g., Thevenin, PNGV, GNL and RC models) have relatively low
computational complexity and easy parameter identification.
However, they cannot fully capture battery internal changes,
probably resulting in lower accuracy compared to electro­
chemical models.
(2) Data-driven approaches can be trained using historical data and
mostly have lower dependencies on the internal degradation
mechanism of batteries compared to model-based approaches
[23]. They employ various algorithms to establish the relation­
ships between input (health indicators, HIs) and output (state-­
of-health, SOH), then use new data for SOH estimation. Thereby,
since a few years ago, many researchers tend to focus on estab­
lishing stronger data-driven models. For instance, Fei et al. [24]
crafted 42 HIs from five kinds of main recorded data including
voltage, current, temperature, internal resistance and capacity,
and then fed them into five representative machine learning (ML)
models including the Gaussian process regression (GPR) [25],
support vector machine (SVM) [10], random forest (RF) [26],
gradient boosting regression tree (GBRT) [27] and neural
network (NN) [28]. Benefiting from the prosperity of deep
learning (DL) methods, in recent years, many works employ
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), recurrent neural net­
works (RNNs), and Transformers to estimate the states of batte­
ries. For example, depending on the powerful local feature
extraction ability of CNNs, Yang et al. [29] utilized 1D-CNN to
handle capacity degradation datasets, while Lee et al. [30]
transformed the data into a two-dimensional format and
employed 2D-CNN. Additionally, dense neural network [31] was
also attempted in similar research.

(1) Computational Complexity Limitations: In the field of battery
state estimation, many existing deep learning models attempt to
achieve higher accuracy by increasing the complexity of model
structures or/and combining different classical models. Those
approaches introduce numerous unnecessary parameter updates,
thereby increasing computational resource demands. Such
complexity may hinder future applications in resourceconstrained devices, such as BMS.
(2) Estimation Accuracy Challenges: Many current approaches
face accuracy challenges due to inherent computational con­
straints within the model itself, insufficient representational ca­
pabilities of the extracted health indicators, or the input of many
weakly correlated health indicators, which together negatively
impact the accuracy of SOH estimation results.
(3) Performance Stability Issues: The training and optimization
process often require extensive hyperparameter tuning to achieve
higher performance, which consumes a lot of time and compu­
tational resources before reaching the desired goals. Such con­
sumption can be effectively reduced if the model is able to
maintain stable and high performance across various hyper­
parameter configurations. However, most existing methods only
present their optimal results without demonstrating the model’s
ability to solve this problem.
To address these challenges, this article develops an efficient deep
learning model, namely BMSFormer, for SOH estimation of lithium-ion
batteries, with the goal of optimizing computational resource usage,
balancing accuracy and efficiency, and enhancing model stability for
reliable performance. The main contributions are summarized as
follows.

However, traditional CNNs are not adept at dealing with long timeseries data, as this requires numerous convolutional layers to fuse local
features that are distant from each other. RNNs and their variants such
as gated recurrent unit (GRU) and long short-term memory (LSTM)
attempt to overcome this challenge with hidden layers, state cells and
various gates. These components function like a “nerve cell” that can
storage information and pass it from one time step to the next for
computation. Nonetheless, due to the sequential dependence, it is not
convenient enough for traditional RNNs to make full use of modern
multi-threaded GPU resources, even though recent works have achieved
some improvements in computational efficiency like bidirectional long
short-term memory (Bi-LSTM) [32,33], Attention-based Spa­
tial-Temporal LSTM (ASTLSTM) [34], CNN-LSTM [35], CNN-ASTLSTM
[36], and CNN-GRU [37], while the fundamental constraint of
limited-sequential computation still remains.
To address the above problem, Vaswani [38] proposed the Trans­
former, a model architecture avoiding recurrence and instead relying on

(1) By progressively shortening the window size and step size, health
indicators (HIs) with higher correlations to the battery health
state are identified within two high-frequency SOC charge and
discharge segments. This approach successfully achieves Pearson
correlation coefficient (PCC) values averaging over 0.99 across
three different kinds of battery.
(2) A Local-Global Fusion Attention module is constructed to effec­
tively capture both short-term and long-term features while
reducing computational complexity compared to traditional
Softmax-based attention mechanisms.
(3) Two kinds of depthwise separable convolution module with small
kernel size (DSConv-S) and large kernel size (DSConv-L) are
embedded to fuse multi-scale and multi-channel features,

2

X. Li et al.

Energy 313 (2024) 134030

enhancing feature diversity with fewer parameters than standard
convolution.

2. Preliminaries
2.1. Overview of the developed SOH estimation approach

The remaining sections of this paper are arranged as follows. Sec­
tion2 describes the major steps of the developed SOH estimation
approach and the basic information of three different kinds of battery
datasets. Section 3 introduces the structure and modules of BMSFormer.
Section 4 presents comprehensive validations and compares BMSFormer
with four prevailing deep learning models. Finally, the conclusions are
summarized in Section 5.

The SOH is a critical metric for evaluating health status of batteries.
While there is still no standardized definition for SOH, battery capacity
remains the most utilized representation [31], as illustrated below:
SOH =

Ccurrent
× 100%,
Crated

(1)

where Ccurrent and Crated are the current capacity and rated capacity,
respectively.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the developed SOH estimation approach

Fig. 1. Flowchart of developed SOH estimation approach.
3

