Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Journal of Energy Storage
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/est

Research papers

Joint state of health and remaining useful life assessment of lithium-ion
batteries using a novel attention mechanism-based deep learning model
and multi-source optimized health indicators
Dexiong Li a,b,* , Yan Xing a , Xiaopeng Li c
a
b
c

School of Mechanical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 211189, China
China National Aeronautical Radio Electronics Research Institute, Shanghai, 200241, China
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shandong, 264209, China

A R T I C L E I N F O

A B S T R A C T

Keywords:
Lithium battery
State-of-health estimation
Deep learning
Deep spatiotemporal conv-attention
Differential temperature-voltage analysis

Accurate assessment of the State of-Health (SOH) and Remaining Useful Life (RUL) of lithium-ion batteries is a
core challenge for ensuring the safe operation of energy storage systems. Recent studies have emphasized the
importance of computational efficiency while acknowledging that traditional models still require significant
performance improvements. However, many existing joint SOH-RUL methods still rely on a single traditional
model or stack multiple conventional models. Therefore, this paper proposes a novel deep learning framework
based on a Deep Spatiotemporal Conv-Attention mechanism. It introduces a feature matrix similarity calculation
and a lightweight convolution-based feature diversity module, enabling the model to capture both long- and
short-term patterns, improve generalization, and reduce computational resource requirements. Furthermore, to
preserve key degradation information from multi-sensor data, differential and integral methods are applied to
extract various health indicators (HIs), and then an optimized HIs selection algorithm based on Pearson and
Spearman correlation coefficients is proposed to screen these indicators. Finally, to comprehensively evaluate the
effectiveness, generalization capability, robustness, computational efficiency, and complexity of the proposed
method, comparative experiments were conducted against various mainstream state-of-the-art models using
three battery datasets with different materials, charging-discharging protocols, and operating temperatures. The
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed model achieves superior performance across all battery
datasets, with a mean absolute percentage error for SOH below 1.156% and a relative error for RUL within
2.210%, providing an efficient and reliable solution for the joint estimation of SOH and RUL in lithium-ion
batteries.

1. Introduction
Lithium-ion batteries are regarded as one of the primary battery
types for future applications due to their lightweight, high energy den­
sity, and excellent cycling performance, making them highly promising
for aviation industry, electric vehicle and other domains [1,2]. There­
fore, precise estimation of the lithium-ion battery state-of-health (SOH)
is essential for guaranteeing the reliability and safety of battery per­
formance [3–5].
Recent approaches to SOH estimation can generally be classified into
model-driven and data-driven methods. [6]. Model-driven approaches
simulate the internal chemical reaction mechanisms of batteries,
enabling the characterization of failure modes in battery parameters

with a certain level of interpretability and prediction accuracy [7,8]. In
contrast, data-driven methods avoid the need for developing detailed
electrochemical models or extensively analyzing electrochemical re­
actions and battery aging mechanisms. Instead, they depend on sensorcollected data, such as current, voltage, temperature, and resistance
throughout each cycle, to evaluate the present health condition of the
battery through data-driven learning, providing generalization
potential.
The predominant data-driven methods currently include Convolu­
tional Neural Networks (CNNs), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs),
such as Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) [9], Gated Recurrent Units
(GRU) [10], and Transformers [11]. CNNs are adept in extracting local
features using convolutional kernels, and reduce the spatial dimensions

* Corresponding author at: School of Mechanical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, 211189, China.
E-mail address: 230219320@seu.edu.cn (D. Li).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2026.121823
Received 13 December 2025; Received in revised form 4 February 2026; Accepted 23 March 2026
Available online 3 April 2026
2352-152X/© 2026 Elsevier Ltd. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

