D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

Table 1
Comparison between different existing SOH estimation methods.
Reference
[1]
[2]
[12]
[15]
[16]
[17]
[37]
[38]
[23]
[25]
[31]
[32]
[45]
Proposed

Source data considered
Current

Voltage

Temperature

✓
x
x
✓
✓
x
✓
✓
x
x
x
✓
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

x
x
✓
x
x
x
✓
✓
x
x
x
✓
✓
✓

HI selection method (author-designed)

Assessment model (whether original)

Efficiency considered

PCC (x)
PCC (✓)
PCC + SCC (x)
PCC (x)
LC (x)
LC (x)
PCC (x)
PCC (x)
PCC (x)
PCC + SCC (x)
PCC (x)
PCC (x)
PCC + SCC (✓)
PCC + SCC (✓)

PINN (✓)
BMSFormer (✓)
BiGRU-Transformer (x)
Transformer (x)
Gaussian filter (x)
Random Forest Regression (x)
CNN-Transformer (x)
CNN (x)
Bi-LSTM (x)
LSSVM-AdaBoost (x)
LSTM (x)
LSTM (x)
Extreme Learning Machine (x)
DSConv-Attention-based (✓)

x
✓
x
x
x
x
✓
x
x
x
x
x
x
✓

individual and fused HIs are subsequently validated through compara­
tive experiments. Furthermore, the selected features are segmented and
reformatted into the structure required by the attention mechanism
before being fed into the model for training and performance evaluation.
In the final stage, the trained model parameters are shared between the
SOH single-step prediction task and the RUL multi-step prediction task.
These tasks are evaluated from different starting points and compared
with state-of-the-art models to provide a comprehensive assessment of
the proposed method.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 pro­
vides a detailed explanation of the proposed algorithm and highlights its
differences from conventional approaches. Section 3 describes the
experimental setup and implementation details. Section 4 presents and
discusses the results, including feature evaluation, accuracy and gener­
alization analysis, model complexity comparison, and ablation studies.
Finally, Section 5 summarizes the main findings and conclusions.

))
(
(
X(l) = LayerNorm H(l) + FFN H(l) ,

(2)

where X(l− 1) denotes the input to the l-th layer, MHSA(⋅) represents the
multi-head self-attention mechanism, and FFN(⋅) denotes a feedforward
neural network applied independently to each position. By stacking L
such layers, the encoder backbone can effectively refine hierarchical
representations while preserving global contextual information.
Building on this backbone structure, the traditional multi-head
attention mechanism applies multiple self-attention operations in par­
allel. For each head, the input is linearly projected into query, key, and
value representations, which are used to calculate attention weights
based on the similarity between elements in the sequence. The weighted
sum of the values produces the output of each head. The outputs of all
heads are then concatenated and linearly transformed to form the final
representation. Formally, for i-th head and l-th layer with input X(l− 1) :

2. Methods
This section introduces the methods used in this study, including the
backbone principles and the proposed improvements. It provides a
detailed description of the DSCA and DSConv modules, highlighting
their principles and enhancements. Additionally, to mitigate the impact
of short-term capacity recovery on SOH and RUL assessment accuracy in
lithium-ion batteries, the CEEMDAN method is introduced for effective
data denoising.

Qi = X(l− 1) WiQ , K = X(l− 1) WiK , V = X(l− 1) WiV

(3)

(
)
Qi KT
A = softmax √̅̅̅̅i
dk

(4)

Hi = Ai Vi

(5)

(
)
MHSA X(l− 1) = Concat(H1 , H2 , …, Hh )WO

(6)

where WiQ , WiK , WiV are the learnable projection matrices, dk is the key
dimension of each head, h is the number of heads, and WO is the output
∑
of projection matrix, and the function softmax(zi ) = exp(zi )/ j exp(zi )

2.1. The designed deep spatiotemporal convolutional attention module

normalizes the similarity scores into a valid probability distribution by
exponentiating each score and dividing it by the sum of all expo­
nentiated values, where i denotes the index of the current element being
normalized, j iterates over all elements in the same vector, and z rep­
resents the input vector containing all unnormalized scores.

This section describes the backbone and the proposed DSCA module,
which enhances feature extraction by integrating convolutional opera­
tions with multi-head attention. It overcomes the limitations of tradi­
tional attention mechanisms, efficiently capturing both local and global
dependencies for SOH and RUL prediction.

2.1.2. The proposed DSCA mechanism
Traditional multi-head self-attention mechanisms excel at capturing
long-range dependencies by computing global correlations across all
elements in the sequence. However, this approach relies on Softmaxbased attention and sequential matrix multiplications, which often
lead to high computational cost and limited efficiency when handling
long-term degradation data of batteries. Moreover, conventional multihead structures may not fully exploit the local spatiotemporal patterns
inherent in multi-source sensor signals, potentially constraining the
model's ability to capture fine-grained health indicators. To address
these limitations, this work introduces the Deep Spatiotemporal ConvAttention (DSCA) module, which integrates convolutional operations
with an optimized attention mechanism. This design enhances the

2.1.1. The traditional attention mechanism
In recent years, Transformer-based architectures have become the
backbone for a wide range of sequence modeling tasks, owing to their
ability to capture long-range dependencies through stacked layers of
multi-head attention and feedforward neural networks. A typical
Transformer encoder is composed of multiple identical layers, each
containing a multi-head self-attention module followed by a positionwise feedforward network. Formally, given an input sequence repre­
sentation X ∈ ℝn×d , the encoder updates the hidden states through a
residual connection and normalization strategy:
))
(
(
H(l) = LayerNorm X(l− 1) + MHSA X(l− 1) ,
(1)
4

D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

Fig. 1. Flowchart of proposed joint SOH-RUL assessment method.

5

D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

learning of both local and global dependencies while reducing compu­
tational overhead, thereby offering a more efficient and accurate feature
extraction framework for SOH and RUL assessment.
The complete model architecture is shown in Fig. 2 and is depicted as
follows: initially, the selected HIs (including both multi-source health
indicators and the denoised capacity trend extracted via CEEMDAN)
serve as input and are processed through the Embedding layer, mapping
them into a high-dimensional space for enhanced information extrac­
tion. These embedded features are then fed into the DSCA and the
Depthwise Separable Convolution (DSConv) modules, which function as
shared feature extraction layers to capture both long- and short-term
degradation patterns. Addition and layer norm (Add & Norm) layers
are incorporated between each module. Finally, the rich representations
extracted by these shared layers are passed through two separate
Feedforward layers (or output heads), which respectively generate the
SOH estimation and RUL prediction as the final outputs of our multi-task
model.
For an input xi to the i − th layer in an N-layer model, the corre­
sponding output yi is computed as follows:
xiʹ = LayerNorm(dropout(DSCA(xi ) ) + xi )

(7)

xiʹ = LayerNorm(dropout(DSCA(xi ) ) + xi )

(8)

xiʹʹ = LayerNorm(DSConv(xiʹ) + xiʹ )

(9)

yi = LayerNorm(dropout(FFN(xiʹʹ) ) + xiʹʹ )

(10)

activation function is applied to Q and K to introduce non-linearity.
These matrices are then reshaped to facilitate multi-head attention,
allowing for joint modeling across multiple subspaces.
In the proposed DSCA module, a ReLU activation function is applied
as the feature mapping operation for the query and key projections. This
design is primarily motivated by the requirement of non-negativity in
linear attention mechanisms, where the attention weights are computed
through kernelized feature mappings rather than the conventional
softmax normalization. By enforcing non-negative representations of the
projected features, ReLU ensures that the resulting attention scores
remain physically interpretable as additive contributions, avoiding un­
desirable cancellation effects caused by mixed-sign interactions.
From the perspective of numerical stability, the ReLU-based map­
ping alleviates the sensitivity of attention computation to smallamplitude noise and extreme values, which are commonly encoun­
tered in battery degradation data due to measurement uncertainty and
short-term capacity fluctuations. By truncating negative responses,
high-frequency noise with low signal-to-noise ratios is effectively sup­
pressed, leading to smoother attention responses and more stable opti­
mization behavior during training.
Although the use of ReLU introduces a sparsity constraint that may
limit the representational expressiveness of individual attention heads,
this effect is mitigated by the use of multiple attention heads, linear
projections, and residual connections in the DSCA module. As a result,
the overall representational capacity of the model is preserved while
benefiting from improved robustness and computational efficiency,
which is particularly desirable for lightweight and large-scale sequence
modeling tasks.
To incorporate local feature extraction, a depthwise separable con­
volutional module is employed. The input sequence is first permuted and
then processed through a depthwise convolution, which is succeeded by
a pointwise convolution.:
(
( ))
(12)
Xconv = PointwiseConv DepthwiseConv XT

where DSCA, DSConv, FFN respectively represent the Deep Spatiotem­
poral Conv-Attention, Depthwise Separable Convolution and Feedfor­
ward layer.
To enhance the capacity of the model in capturing both local de­
pendencies and global correlations in sequential data, this study pro­
poses the DSCA module. Unlike conventional self-attention mechanisms
that primarily focus on global relationships, DSConv integrates depth­
wise separable convolutions with a linear attention mechanism,
enabling efficient feature extraction while reducing computational
complexity [42–44].
The attention mechanism is formulated as follows. First, three linear
projections are applied to transform the input into query Q, key K, and
value V matrices:
Q = ReLU(XWQ ), K = ReLU(XWK ), V = XWV

where the depthwise convolution extracts fine-grained local de­
pendencies, and the pointwise convolution integrates these features
across channels. The resulting representation retains the sequential
structure while enriching local information.
Following the convolutional enhancement, the attention computa­
tion is performed using a linear attention mechanism. Instead of the
traditional SoftMax-based scaling, the interaction between key and
value matrices is computed directly:

(11)

where WQ , WK , WV ∈ ℝE×E are learnable weight matrices, and the ReLU

Fig. 2. Proposed model structure.
6

D. Li et al.

A = KV T

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

computational efficiency, this section introduces the Depthwise Sepa­
rable Convolution (DSConv) framework. First, we review conventional
and depthwise separable convolutions, highlighting their computational
characteristics. Then, we present our specifically designed DSConv
module, MBConv1, which leverages multi-layer depthwise convolutions
and residual connections to efficiently capture multi-scale local de­
pendencies while maintaining gradient stability.

(13)

This operation captures intrinsic correlations between different time
steps. The attended representation is subsequently obtained by
computing the weighted sum of A and the query matrix:
AQ
Y = √̅̅̅̅
dk

(14)

where dk represents the dimensionality of each attention head. Finally, a
linear transformation is applied, followed by a residual connection that
integrates the original input with the attended representation:
Z = X + Linear(Y)

2.2.1. The conventional convolution and depthwise separable convolution
In convolutional neural networks, a standard convolution layer
jointly models spatial correlations and cross-channel interactions
through learnable kernels. Specifically, given an input tensor
X ∈ ℝB×H×W×Cin , where B is the batch size, H and W denote the spatial
dimensions, and Cin is the number of input channels, a convolution
kernel W ∈ ℝk×k×Cin ×Cout produces an output feature map Y as

(15)

This residual connection mitigates gradient vanishing issues and
facilitates efficient information propagation. Through the integration of
convolutional operations and linear attention, DSCA enhances perfor­
mance in sequential learning tasks by combining local feature extraction
with global context modeling, all while preserving computational
efficiency.
To quantitatively evaluate the computational efficiency of the pro­
posed attention mechanism, the complexity of each operation is
analyzed and compared with that of the conventional self-attention
mechanism.
In the standard multi-head self-attention, the attention matrix A =
QKT requires a pairwise similarity computation between all queries and
keys, resulting in a quadratic complexity with respect to the sequence
length n:
(
)
Otradition = O n2 d
(16)

Y = X*W

(20)

where * denotes the 2D convolution operator. For each output channel j ,
the operation can be expressed asThe computation for each output
channel can be expressed as
Yj =

Cin
∑
i=1

Xi * Wij .

The computational complexity of this operation is
)
O k2 ⋅Cin ⋅Cout ⋅H⋅W ,
(

(21)

(22)

and the number of learnable parameters is
P = k2 ⋅Cin ⋅Cout

where d denotes the embedding dimension. This quadratic dependency
severely limits scalability when processing long time-series data.
In contrast, the proposed DSCA reformulates the attention operation
into a linearized two-step form. Specifically, it first computes the key­
–value correlation matrix M = KV T ∈ ℝd×d , followed by a projection
with the query vector:
(
)
(17)
Y = MQ = KV T Q

(23)

Although standard convolutions are effective in jointly capturing
local spatial dependencies and inter-channel correlations, they intro­
duce significant computational cost and memory overhead, which be­
comes a bottleneck in lightweight architectures and time-series
applications with long input sequences.
To address this limitation, depthwise separable convolution
(DSConv) decomposes the standard convolution into two steps:
First, depthwise convolution applies a k × k filter to each input
channel independently, capturing spatial correlations without mixing
channels. Its complexity is
(
)
O k2 ⋅Cin ⋅H⋅W
(24)

This design eliminates the pairwise token interaction of O(n2 ) and
reduces the computational complexity to:
)
(
(18)
Oproposed = O nd2
Since d≪n in most practical settings, the proposed structure achieves
near-linear complexity with respect to the sequence length. The theo­
retical ratio between the two complexities is:
( )
Oproposed
d
(19)
== O
n
Otradition

Next, pointwise convolution employs a 1 × 1 convolution to linearly
combine the outputs across channels to produce Cout feature maps, with
complexity

indicating that DSCA reduces the overall computational cost approxi­
mately by a factor n/d.
Moreover, the convolutional enhancement branch introduces an
additional term O(nk), where k is the kernel size, which remains negli­
(
)
gible compared to O nd2 .

O(Cin ⋅Cout ⋅H⋅W)

(25)

Thus, the total complexity of DSConv becomes
)
O k2 ⋅Cin ⋅H⋅W + Cin ⋅Cout ⋅H⋅W ,

(26)

(

which is significantly lower than the standard convolution when k is
large or Cout ≫Cin . At the same time, DSConv maintains a comparable
ability to capture both spatial and channel dependencies, making it a
widely adopted operator in lightweight deep learning models.

Therefore, the DSCA mechanism maintains strong spatiotemporal
modeling capability while significantly improving computational effi­
ciency and scalability.

2.2.2. The designed DSConv module
A standard convolution is decomposed into a depthwise convolution
and a pointwise convolution by DSConv, which breaks down a con­
ventional convolution into two components: a depthwise convolution
and a pointwise convolution. [45–48], significantly reducing computa­
tional complexity while preserving feature extraction capabilities.
The proposed MBConv1 module is a deep 1D convolutional block
designed to capture multi-scale local dependencies while maintaining
efficient gradient flow through a residual connection. Given an input

2.2. The depthwise separable convolution module
Convolutional operations are a fundamental building block in neural
networks, enabling models to extract spatial and temporal dependencies
from data. However, standard convolutions often incur high computa­
tional cost and memory usage, particularly in time-series applications
with long sequences. To balance feature extraction capability and
7

D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

Subsequent IMFs are extracted iteratively from the updated re­
siduals. At the k-th step, the residual rk− 1 (t) is perturbed by additive
white noise, followed by EMD decomposition. The first IMF of each
perturbed signal is averaged to obtain the k-th IMF, written as

tensor X ∈ ℝB×L×C , where B is the batch size, L is the sequence length,
and C is the embedding dimension, the computation begins with a
pointwise convolution that expands the channel dimension by a factor of
r:
Y1 = X⋅Wpw1 ∈ ℝB×L×rC
pw1

(27)

IMFk (t) =

C×rC

where W
∈ℝ
, the expanded feature map is then processed
sequentially through three depthwise convolutions with kernel size k =
3, which independently operate on each channel to capture local
sequential patterns while keeping parameter overhead minimal:
Yi+1 = σ (DepthwiseConv(Yi , K) ), i = 1, 2, 3

(28)

x(t) =
(29)

(30)

Finally, a residual connection is added to enhance gradient propa­
gation and stabilize training, producing the output
Y = X + Y6

(31)

In this manner, MBConv1 efficiently expands the feature space to
extract rich representations, leverages depthwise convolutions to cap­
ture multi-scale local dependencies, and employs residual connections
to maintain training stability, making it well-suited for deep sequential
modeling with low computational cost.
2.3. Complete ensemble empirical mode decomposition with adaptive
noise
The Complete Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition with
Adaptive Noise (CEEMDAN) is an enhanced version of the classical EMD
and EEMD methods, specifically designed to address mode mixing and
residual noise problems in nonlinear and non-stationary signal analysis.
The algorithm incorporates adaptive noise at each stage of the decom­
position and averages the results of multiple realizations, ensuring that
the extracted intrinsic mode functions (IMFs) exhibit stronger physical
interpretability and improved stability.
In this study, CEEMDAN is not treated as a generic preprocessing
technique applied to the entire dataset globally, but rather as a taskoriented signal enhancement module with a clear strategic role in RUL
prediction that rigorously adheres to the causality principle of timeseries analysis. Crucially, the raw capacity sequence is first divided
into distinct training and validation sets based on chronological order.
CEEMDAN is then applied independently to the capacity data within
each of these pre-divided segments (i.e., training data and validation
data). This ensures that the feature extraction process for the training
data does not incorporate any information from the future (validation)
data, thereby strictly preventing data leakage and ensuring practical
deploy ability.
Given an observed signal x(t), CEEMDAN first generates perturbed
signals by introducing independent realizations of Gaussian white noise,
expressed as xi (t) = x(t) + εωi (t), where ε denotes the noise amplitude
and εωi (t) represents the i-th noise sequence. Each perturbed signal is
then decomposed using EMD, and the first IMF obtained from each
realization is averaged to yield the final first-level component, i.e.,
N
1 ∑
IMF1 (t) =
IMF1,i (t),
N i=1

K
∑
k=1

IMFk (t) + rK (t)

(34)

Compared with EMD, CEEMDAN alleviates mode mixing by incor­
porating noise-assisted decomposition, while simultaneously over­
coming the residual ambiguity introduced in EEMD. As a result, each
extracted IMF is better defined and more physically meaningful, making
CEEMDAN particularly suitable for analyzing nonlinear and nonstationary time series.
In this study, CEEMDAN is not treated as a generic preprocessing
technique but is explicitly introduced as a task-oriented signal
enhancement module with a clear strategic role in RUL prediction. By
decomposing the raw capacity sequence into IMFs with distinct fre­
quency characteristics, CEEMDAN enables the effective isolation of
high-frequency noise–dominated components, which are mainly asso­
ciated with measurement uncertainty and short-term capacity regener­
ation. These noise-sensitive components can be selectively suppressed
during signal reconstruction, thereby reducing irregular fluctuations
while preserving the physically meaningful degradation information.
Owing to the resulting smoother and quasi-monotonic input represen­
tation, the joint SOH–RUL training process exhibits improved conver­
gence behavior, characterized by faster convergence speed, reduced
training oscillations, and fewer abrupt prediction jumps, as the denoised
signals alleviate gradient instability and facilitate more stable
optimization.
Considering the common issues of short-term capacity regeneration
and abrupt fluctuations in existing SOH estimation and RUL prediction
methods, this study introduces the CEEMDAN technique to denoise and
decompose the raw capacity data. The decomposition results of Cell1,
B0005 and CS2–35 are presented in Fig. 3.
Based on the previous correlation analysis, HI3, HI4, and HI6 exhibit
strong and complementary correlations with SOH, thereby providing a
reliable foundation for joint SOH–RUL modeling. However, directly
relying on raw capacity curves for RUL prediction is often affected by
short-term capacity fluctuations and measurement noise, which reduces
prediction accuracy. To address this limitation, CEEMDAN decomposi­
tion is employed to extract more representative long-term degradation
trends from the capacity sequence.
As shown in Fig. 3, different IMF components capture multi-scale
fluctuations of capacity. Among them, higher-order IMFs show the
strongest correlation with capacity and can effectively track the overall
degradation pattern of SOH. In particular, IMF6 not only suppresses
high-frequency disturbances but also preserves the long-term monotonic
degradation signal. Therefore, IMF6 is ultimately selected as the
“denoised capacity” input feature for the subsequent RUL prediction
module, thereby significantly enhancing the accuracy and robustness of
lifetime prediction.

after which a second pointwise convolution reduces the channel
dimension back to the original size:
Y6 = Y5 ⋅Wpw2 ∈ ℝB×L×C

(33)

The residual is updated as rk (t) = rk− 1 (t) − IMFk (t). The process is
repeated until the final residual rK (t)becomes a monotonic function or
contains no oscillatory components. The original signal can therefore be
reconstructed as

then a ReLU activation is applied to introduce non-linearity:
Y5 = ReLU(Y4 )

N
1 ∑
IMFk,i (t)
N i=1

2.4. Joint assessment framework

(32)

The core of the joint estimation framework is a unified multi-task
deep learning model designed to simultaneously predict SOH and
RUL. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the model comprises shared feature
extraction layers (consisting of DSCA and DSConv modules) that learn

where N denotes the number of realizations. The corresponding residual
is computed as r1 (t)=x(t) − IMF1 (t).
8

D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

Fig. 3. CEEMDAN decomposition results of (a) Cell1, (b) B0005 and (c) CS2-–35.

comprehensive degradation representations from the input health in­
dicators (including the CEEMDAN-derived denoised capacity).
Following these shared layers, the model incorporates two distinct taskspecific output heads (Feedforward layers), each responsible for gener­
ating the SOH estimation and RUL prediction, respectively. This archi­
tecture allows the model to leverage shared knowledge about battery
degradation while tailoring predictions to each specific task. The overall
optimization objective is to minimize the total loss L Total , defined as:

be relatively suppressed. This prevents the gradient of the more chal­
lenging task from dominating the overall model update direction in the
initial phases, thereby ensuring that both tasks receive adequate
learning. Through this dynamic balancing, the model can automatically
explore the intrinsic relationship between SOH and RUL predictions and
converge to a Pareto-optimal solution—minimizing the total loss L Total
without excessively compromising the performance of either task.
3. Experiments

(35)

L Total = αL SOH + βL RUL

To ensure a comprehensive and rigorous evaluation of the proposed
method, this section provides a detailed description of the experimental
setup. First, the evaluation metrics employed in this work are introduced
to establish consistent performance criteria. The configurations of the
baseline and proposed models are then outlined, followed by the defi­
nitions of SOH and RUL to clarify the prediction targets. Subsequently,
the datasets used in this study are presented, highlighting their char­
acteristics and relevance to the experiments. Finally, the process of
feature extraction and selection is discussed, which serves as the foun­
dation for reliable model training and validation.

In this formulation,L SOH and L RUL represent the loss functions for the
SOH estimation task and the RUL prediction task, respectively. To
ensure training stability and robustness against outliers, both task losses
are computed using the Mean Absolute Error (MAE), defined as follows:
n ⃒
⃒
∑
⃒ (i)
̂ SOH ) = 1
̂ (i) ⃒⃒
L SOH = MAE(YSOH , Y
− Y
⃒Y
SOH
n i=1 SOH

̂ RUL ) =
L RUL = MAE(YRUL , Y

⃒
n ⃒
1∑
⃒ (i)
̂ (i) ⃒⃒
⃒YRUL − Y
RUL
n i=1

(36)

(37)

̂ represents the predicted
Here, Y denotes the ground truth value, Y
value, and n is the number of samples.
The coefficients α and β are crucial weighting parameters that bal­
ance the relative importance of the two tasks. Departing from traditional
approaches that rely on fixed weights or manual tuning, the innovation
of this work is to treat both α and β as trainable parameters. During
model training, these weight parameters are updated concurrently with
other network parameters (e.g., those in convolutional and LSTM layers)
via backpropagation.
This optimization mechanism operates as follows: in the early stages
of training, the model dynamically adjusts the values of α and β based on
the initial loss magnitudes of the SOH and RUL tasks. If the loss of one
task is significantly larger than the other, its corresponding weight may

3.1. Evaluation metrics
3.1.1. SOH related
Mean Absolute Error (MAE), Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) are three widely utilized in­
dicators to assess the performance of models [49,50]. The formulas are
described as follows:
MAE =

n
1∑
|yi − ̂
yi|
n i=1

RMSE =
9

√̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
n
1∑
y i )2
(yi − ̂
n i=1

(38)

(39)

D. Li et al.

MAPE =

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

⃒
n ⃒
⃒ yi − ̂
1∑
y i ⃒⃒
⃒
× 100%
n i=1 ⃒ yi ⃒

to evaluate the performance of the proposed method. The models
considered include the proposed model, the original CNN-Transformer,
the conventional Transformer, LSTM, MLP, and a pure CNN model. The
proposed model integrates deep separable convolution with attention
mechanisms, enabling efficient extraction of local and global features.
The CNN-Transformer and Transformer serve as attention-based base­
lines to investigate the contribution of the proposed dual-channel
feature fusion and depthwise separable convolution modules. LSTM is
included to represent recurrent architectures commonly used for
sequence modeling, while MLP is employed to assess the effect of feedforward networks without temporal dependencies. The CNN model, on
the other hand, provides a representative convolutional baseline to
evaluate the capability of purely local feature extraction.
The detailed layer configurations of these models are summarized in
Table 2, including embedding dimensions, attention modules, con­
volutional blocks, normalization layers, pooling, and final prediction
layers. This selection of diverse architectures allows for a thorough
assessment of both the predictive accuracy and generalization ability of
the proposed method relative to conventional deep learning approaches.
Before training, all extracted features from the cycling datasets are
normalized using min–max scaling to enhance numerical stability and
accelerate convergence. The datasets are then partitioned into training
and testing subsets in a 3:7 ratio. To ensure robustness and reproduc­
ibility, all reported performance metrics are averaged over five inde­
pendent experiments with randomized data splits. Subsequently, our
proposed model is employed to estimate the state of health from the
preprocessed input sequences.
In the training process, a grid search strategy is employed to optimize
the hyperparameters of the attention-based models, including the pro­
posed model, CNN-Transformer, and Transformer. Grid search is chosen
due to its simplicity and exhaustive nature, which allows systematic
evaluation of all possible combinations of predefined hyperparameter
values, ensuring that the selected configuration provides robust per­
formance across the validation dataset. The hyperparameters considered
in this study include the learning rate (1e-2, 1e-3), number of attention
blocks (1, 2, 4), dense layer dimensions (16, 32, 64, 128), embedding
dimensions (16, 32, 64, 128), number of attention heads (1, 2, 4), and
the number of training epochs (200,1000). By evaluating all combina­
tions of these parameters, the optimal configuration is selected based on
the model's performance metrics. In addition, the dense layer di­
mensions of the MLP model and the hidden layer dimensions of the
LSTM are tuned using the same set of dense layer dimensions (16, 32, 64,
128), while the number of layers for both is adjusted via the parameter
set (1, 2, 4). For the CNN layers, only the learning rate and the number of
training epochs are employed for hyperparameter tuning.

(40)

where y represents the actual value, ̂
y denotes the predicted value and n
is the number of samples.
3.1.2. RUL related
To quantitatively assess the accuracy of RUL prediction, two
commonly used error metrics are employed: the Absolute Error (AE) and
the Relative Error (RE). AE measures the absolute deviation between the
predicted RUL value and the true RUL value. It directly reflects the
prediction bias in units of cycles. RE normalizes the absolute error by the
true RUL value, thereby providing a scale-independent assessment of
prediction accuracy. This is particularly useful when the actual RUL
varies significantly across different cells or degradation stages. The
formulas for AE and RE are given as follows:
̂ i − RULi |
AEi = | RUL

(41)

̂ i − RULi |
| RUL
RULi

(42)

RE =

̂ i and RULi denote the predicted and true RUL values for the
where RUL
i− th sample, respectively.
3.1.3. Training process
Battery capacity degradation exhibits strong temporal dependency.
A single SOH value represents only a static health state at a specific
cycle, whereas a short sequence of consecutive cycles implicitly contains
dynamic information such as degradation trends and variation rates,
including first-order and even second-order temporal characteristics. In
the preprocessing stage, a sliding window strategy is adopted to
construct sequential inputs, which is widely used in attention-based
time-series models. Specifically, a fixed-length window with a length
of n and a sliding stride of one cycle is applied to segment the time series
composed of HIs and corresponding SOH values.
Due to the sliding window mechanism, the first valid prediction is
generated at the n-th cycle rather than at the first cycle. This is not
caused by skipping early-cycle information; instead, the model requires
a minimum number of historical cycles to form a complete input
sequence. Once this initialization condition is satisfied, the SOH is
estimated in a one-step-ahead prediction manner, where each prediction
corresponds exclusively to the next single cycle.
This sequential formulation allows the model to leverage short-term
temporal dependencies while maintaining a consistent single-step SOH
estimation setting throughout the prediction horizon.
Prior to model input, the data undergoes min–max normalization to
eliminate scale discrepancies among features. For model training, the
Adam optimizer is adopted with mean squared error (MSE) as the loss
function, formulated as follows:
MSE =

n
1∑
y i )2
(yi − ̂
n i=1

3.3. Multi-task definition
3.3.1. SOH
SOH is a metric used to describe the current condition of a lithiumion battery relative to its ideal or initial state [39,51–54]. It is
commonly characterized as the ratio of the battery's present maximum
capacity (Ct ) to its initial nominal capacity (C0 ), expressed as follows:
( )
Ct
SOH =
× 100%
(44)
C0

(43)

Hyperparameter tuning is performed via grid search, and the batch
size is empirically set to 128. To mitigate randomness and ensure
robustness against data partitioning biases, five independent training
and validation runs are conducted under different random seeds in Py­
thon. The final test results are averaged across all five test sets to
guarantee statistical significance and reproducibility. This rigorous
validation framework enhances the reliability of experimental
conclusions.

As the battery undergoes charge and discharge cycles, its capacity
gradually declines, leading to a decrease in SOH.
3.3.2. RUL
The task of remaining useful life (RUL) prediction aims to estimate
the number of cycles remaining before a battery reaches its End of
Performance (EOP). The EOP is defined based on a SOH threshold,
typically when SOH ≤ 0.8. Let C(c) denote the capacity at cycle c, and
define the true EOP index as

3.2. Model configurations
In this study, a comprehensive comparison of six models is conducted
10

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

D. Li et al.

Table 2
The layer configurations of different deep learning models.
Proposed

CNN-Transformer

Transformer

MLP

LSTM

CNN

Input
Embed layer
DSCA
Dropout, Add&Norm
DSConv module
Add&Norm

Input
Embed layer
Positional Encoder
Softmax Attention
Conv1D (1 × 3, 1) ReLU
MaxPooling1D
(2,2)
Conv1D (1 × 3, 1)
ReLU, Add&Norm
Softmax Attention
Add&Norm
MLP
Add&Norm
Linear

Input
Embed layer
Positional Encoder
Softmax Attention
Add&Norm
Softmax Attention

Input
Embed layer
Layer Norm
Dense layer & ReLU
Dense layer& dropout
Add

Input
Linear
LSTM layer (32)
LSTM layer (32)
LSTM layer (32)
Linear

Input
Conv1D (1 × 5, 1) ReLU
MaxPooling
Conv1D (1 × 7, 1) ReLU
MaxPooling
Conv1D (1 × 5, 1) ReLU

Add&Norm

Linear

MLP
Linear

MLP
Add&Norm

EOP = min{c ∈ ℕ|C(c) ≤ γC0 }.

cathode material. Aging tests were conducted in a thermal chamber
maintained at 40 ◦ C. The charging protocol involved a constant current
(CC) phase at 1C rate until the voltage reached 4.2 V, followed by a
constant voltage (CV) phase at 4.2 V until the current tapered to 0.02C.
Subsequently, the batteries were discharged following a drive cycle
derived from the urban Artemis profile. Characterization measurements
were taken every 100 cycles to monitor degradation trends. The eight
cells capacity degradation curves are shown in Fig. 4(a)-(b).
The NASA Prognostics Data Repository contains experimental data
from four 18,650-model Li-ion batteries (B0005, B0006, B0007, and
B0018) subjected to standardized aging tests under controlled ambient
conditions (24 ◦ C) [18]. Each battery underwent repeated chargedischarge cycles and impedance measurements to study degradation
patterns. Charging followed a two-phase protocol: Constant Current
(CC) at 1.5 A until reaching 4.2 V, followed by Constant Voltage (CV)
until the current dropped to 20 mA. Discharge cycles were conducted at
2 A CC mode, with cutoff voltages varying by battery: 2.7 V (B0005), 2.2
V (B0007), and 2.5 V (B0006, B0018). The capacity degradation curves
of these four batteries are shown in Fig. 4(c)-(d).
The CALCE battery datasets [56] includes four prismatic lithium-ion
batteries manufactured by LG Chem, each with a nominal capacity of
1.1 Ah and employing lithium cobalt oxide as the cathode material. All
aging experiments are conducted under room temperature conditions.
The charging process follows a constant current protocol at 0.5 C until
the voltage reaches 4.2 V, after which a constant voltage phase is applied
at 4.2 V until the charging current falls below 0.02 A. Discharging is
performed at a constant current of 2 A until the voltage drops to 2.7 V.
The degradation patterns observed in the CALCE dataset are illustrated
in Fig. 4(e).

(45)

Given an observation cycle c0 , the RUL in cycles is defined as
RUL(c0 ) = EOP − c0 .

(46)

In practice, the predicted RUL is obtained by first determining the

̂
predicted EOP from the model's capacity forecast C(⋅):
̂ = min{cʹ ≥ c0 | C(c
̂ ʹ) ≤ γC0 },
EOP

̂ − c0 .
̂ 0 ) = EOP
RUL(c

(47)

Equations above indicate that, at a given evaluation point c0 , the
total life can be expressed as EOP = c0 + RUL(c0 ) for the true value and
̂ = c0 + RUL(c
̂ 0 ) for the predicted value.
EOP
3.4. Experimental datasets
To assess the generalization ability and performance superiority of
the proposed model, three battery datasets, Oxford, NASA, and CALCE,
are selected for evaluation. These datasets comprise batteries with
different capacities, chemistries, and charge–discharge protocols, and
the cycle counts differ substantially between the two battery types. The
main characteristics of these datasets are summarized in Table 3.
The Oxford battery dataset [55] contains data from eight Kokam
SLPB533459H4 lithium-ion pouch cells, each featuring a nominal ca­
pacity of 740 mAh. These cells utilize lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) as the
Table 3
Basic information of each battery dataset.
Data Sources

Oxford [28]

NASA [15]

CALCE [29]

Cell types
Cathode material
Selected battery
series
Battery number
Rated capacity
(Ah)
Capacity failure
threshold (Ah)
Charge protocol
(rate)
Discharge protocol
(rate)
Cut-off voltage (V)

Pouch
NCO-LCO
Cell (1 to 8)
8
0.74

18650 Cylindrical
NCA
B00 (05 to 07 and
18)
4
2

Prismatic
LCO
CS2 (35 to
38)
4
1.1

70%

1.4 (70%)

0.84 (76.4%)

CC (2C)

CC-CV
(0.75C,4.2V)
CC (1C)

CC-CV
(0.5C,4.2V)
CC (1C)

Cut-off current (A)

–

charge to 4.2
discharge to 2.7/
2.5/2.2/2.5
charge to 0.02

Experiment
temperature
(◦ C)
Cycle numbers

40

24

charge to 4.2
discharge to
2.7
charge to
0.05
24

8200/7700/8100/
5100/5000/5000/
8100/8100

168/168/168/
132

881/935/
971/995

variance
charge to 4.2
discharge to 2.7

Linear

3.5. Feature engineering
3.5.1. Health indicators extraction
In this section, voltage, temperature, time, and capacity data from
the battery charging process are analyzed and processed to derive four
characteristic curves: Incremental Capacity (IC), Charge Voltage Time
(CVT), Differential Temperature Voltage (DTV), and Differential Tem­
perature Capacity (DTC), as shown in Fig. 5(a)-(d). From these curves,
ten representative HIs are extracted, capturing key features related to
battery degradation. The ten HIs and their corresponding descriptions
are summarized in Table 4.
Incremental Capacity (IC) analysis is a diagnostic technique used to
assess the health of lithium-ion batteries by examining the differential
relationship between capacity and voltage during charging or dis­
charging processes [19]. The IC curve is obtained by computing the
derivative of capacity (Q) with respect to voltage (V), represented
mathematically as:

11

D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

Fig. 4. SOH degradation curves and corresponding voltage, current, and temperature profiles of (a–b) Oxford, (c–d) NASA, and (e) CALCE datasets.

Fig. 5. All cycle curves of (a) DTV, (b) DTC, (c) IC and (d) CVT and the position of each HIs extraction.

12

D. Li et al.

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

of battery aging and degradation. To leverage these characteristics, we
extract the peak value of the DTC curve as HI9 and the corresponding
capacity as HI10. The processed DTC curve and the positions of these
extracted HIs are shown in Fig. 5(d). The DTC curve represents the rate
of temperature change with respect to capacity during the charging
process, providing insights into the battery's thermal characteristics and
internal reaction mechanisms. It is defined as:
( )
T
dT T(k + N) − T(k)
=
≈
(51)
DTC = d
Q
dQ Q(k + N) − Q(k)

Table 4
Multi-source health indicators.
No.

Description on Health Indicators

HI1
HI2

The peak value of the incremental capacity (IC) curves
The voltage corresponding to the peak of the incremental capacity (IC)
curves
The charge time within the voltage range of 3.8–4.2 V
The charge time within the voltage range of 4.16–4.17 V
The peak value of the differential temperature–voltage (DTV) curves
The voltage corresponding to the peak of the differential
temperature–voltage (DTV) curves
The valley value of the differential temperature–voltage (DTV) curves
The voltage corresponding to the valley of the differential
temperature–voltage (DTV) curves
The peak value of the differential temperature–capacity (DTC) curves
The capacity corresponding to the peak of the differential
temperature–capacity (DTC) curves

HI3
HI4
HI5
HI6
HI7
HI8
HI9
HI10

( )
Q
dQ ΔQ
=
≈
IC = d
V
dV ΔV

where T, Q, k and N denotes the temperature, capacity, the k sample
point and the interval of two sample points. To reduce the impact of
significant noise in the DTC curve, a moving average smoothing process
with a window size of 200 is applied.
3.5.2. Health indicators selection
The extraction of HIs is a crucial step in the SOH estimation of
lithium-ion batteries [60–62], as the quality of the extracted indicators
directly determines the precise of the final SOH estimation. The Pearson
(γ) correlation coefficient (PCC) and the Spearman (ρ) correlation co­
efficient (SCC) are calculated to analyze the correlation between HIs and
SOH. PCC measures the linear correlation, while SCC assesses the
monotonic relationship between variables, making it more suitable for
capturing nonlinear dependencies. The formulas for PCC and SCC are
given as follows:

(48)

The IC curve typically exhibits distinct peaks corresponding to spe­
cific electrochemical reactions within the battery [57]. To better eval­
uate the role of the IC curve in revealing battery degradation
information, the IC curve is analyzed during the charging process, as
shown in Fig. 5(a), the peaks and their associated voltages are marked as
HI1 and HI2, respectively. The charge voltage curve records the varia­
tion of battery voltage over time and is commonly used to extract HIs,
such as the charging voltage time from 3.8 V to 4.2 V. Due to its
simplicity in extraction and high correlation, inspired by a series of
studies [2,20,52,58], the time intervals during which the charging
voltage ranges from 3.8 V to 4.2 V and from 4.16 V to 4.17 V as health
indicators are extracted as HI3 and HI4, respectively, as shown in Fig. 5
(b). The calculation formula is as follows:
CVT = t(V1 ) − t(V2 )

n
∑

γ=

cov(X, Y)

σX σY

(Xk − X)(Yi − Y)
k
,
= √̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
n
n
∑
∑
(Xk − X)2 (Yk − Y)2
k

(52)

k

where n,Xk ,Yk ,X and Y are the number of sample, the value of true SOH,
the HI, the mean of X and Y, respectively.
∑n
1
i=1 (R(Xi ) − R(X) )(R(Yi ) − R(Y) )
n
̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅̅
ρ=√
(53)
)(
),
√(
√ ∑n
∑
2
n
2
1
√ 1
i=1 (R(Xi ) − R(X) )
i=1 (R(Yi ) − R(Y) )
n
n

(49)

where t represents the charging time when the voltage reaches V1 and
V2 .
The Differential Temperature (DT) curve is a valuable diagnostic tool
for assessing the SOH of lithium-ion batteries [59]. By plotting the rate
of temperature change against voltage during charging or discharging,
the DT curve highlights subtle thermal behaviors that are often imper­
ceptible in standard temperature profiles. This enhanced sensitivity
enables the detection of minor variations in internal resistance and heat
generation, which are indicative of aging mechanisms such as electrode
degradation or electrolyte decomposition. To construct the DTV curve,
one calculates the derivative of temperature with respect to voltage,
expressed mathematically as:
( )
T
dT T(k + N) − T(k)
DTV = d
=
≈
(50)
V
dV V(k + N) − V(k)

where R(Xi ) and R(Yi ) are the ranks of the SOH and HI, respectively; n is
the sample size.
Furthermore, the correlation coefficients for all HIs of each battery
cell can be calculated using the above formulas. The heatmap of PCC and
SCC for cell1 to cell4 is shown in Fig. 6, where the strength of correlation
is visually represented using circle size and color intensity. Larger and
darker circles indicate a stronger correlation between the HI and SOH,
while smaller and lighter circles indicate weaker correlations. An HI
with a strong correlation (greater than 0.9) in one battery may exhibit a
weaker correlation (less than 0.9) in another. For example, the PCC and
SCC of HI10 are 0.95 and 0.94 for Cell1, respectively, whereas in Cell 3,
they decrease to 0.88 and 0.86. This discrepancy may affect the pre­
diction accuracy of a model trained on Cell 1 when applied to Cell 3.
Therefore, an effective method for selecting strongly correlated HIs that
are applicable across multiple battery cells is essential.
Many existing SOH estimation methods select HIs solely based on the
magnitude of their correlation coefficients. However, this approach
often proves ineffective when the correlation distributions of different
HIs vary significantly, such as under different battery chemistries or
various temperature conditions. In these scenarios, an HI that performs
well in one setting may not be suitable in another. Therefore, to ensure
the robustness and applicability of selected HIs across diverse condi­
tions, it is essential to introduce a more effective selection strategy that
not only considers correlation coefficients but also incorporates a
rational screening mechanism based on their distribution
characteristics.
Therefore, a HI selection algorithm is proposed. This method first

where T, V, k and N denotes the temperature, voltage, the k sample point
and the interval of two sample points. Since the DTV curve contains
significant noise, a moving average smoothing process with a window
size of 200 is employed to mitigate this effect.
Considering that the peaks and valleys of the DTV curve can char­
acterize the battery's thermal and electrochemical behaviors during
charging, four HIs are extracted: the peak of the DTV curve (HI5), the
voltage corresponding to the peak (HI6), the valley (HI7), and the
voltage corresponding to the valley (HI8). These HIs reflect heat gen­
eration, internal resistance changes, and phase transitions within the
battery, providing insights into its degradation characteristics. The
processed DTV curve and the positions of these four HIs are shown in
Fig. 5(c).
The DTC curve effectively highlights thermal anomalies, phase
transitions, and heat generation patterns, making it a valuable indicator
13

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

D. Li et al.

Fig. 6. Hotspot maps of PCC and SCC between SOH and ten HIs.

calculates both the Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficients of
multiple candidate HIs across all battery cells to jointly evaluate their
linear and monotonic nonlinear relationships with battery degradation.
Only HIs whose Pearson and Spearman correlation coefficients are both
greater than 0.8 are retained, ensuring that the selected HIs exhibit
strong and robust relevance to SOH under different operating

conditions. The retained HIs are then ranked according to their corre­
lation strength, and features with inter-feature correlation coefficients
higher than 0.95 are further removed to eliminate highly redundant
information while preserving sufficient feature diversity. Based on this
process, the final HI subset is obtained following the screening proced­
ure described in Table 5.
Through our HIs selection method, three HIs (HI3, HI4, and HI6) that
meet the selection criteria are identified. The PCC and SCC values of
these three selected HIs for each battery are shown in Table 6. It can be
observed that both HI3 and HI4 exhibit strong correlations, with PCC
and SCC values exceeding 0.99, indicating their consistently high per­
formance across all batteries. In comparison, HI6 shows a slightly lower
correlation, with an average value of 0.9789, but still meets the selection
criteria.
The correlation-based HI selection is intentionally performed using
data from multiple cells within the same battery group. This approach
aims to ensure the statistical robustness and generalizability of the
selected indicator, as a HI derived from a single cell may not adequately
represent population-level degradation patterns. By evaluating candi­
dates across several cells, we identify a composite HI that captures
common degradation characteristics, thereby reducing reliance on cellspecific randomness.

Table 5
Steps of health indicators selection for a group of cells.
Procedure: HIs selection
1.Calculate the PCC (γ) and SCC (ρ) of n HIs for m cells
2.Obtain the average PCC (γi ) and SCC (ρi ) for each HI
3.Obtain ith HI (fi ) with γi >= 0.8 or ρi > = 0.8, and order from highest to lowest
[
]
4.Construct A = f1 , f2,…, fn
5.For i = 1, 2, …, n
For j = 1, 2, …, m
If γij ≤ 0.95 or ρij ≤ 0.95
Delete fi from A
End
End
End
6.Output A

14

Journal of Energy Storage 161 (2026) 121823

D. Li et al.

Crucially, this selection process is confined to the within-group
design phase. Once the optimal composite HI is determined for a
given group, it is fixed and directly applied for feature extraction in
subsequent health estimation tasks—including those involving unseen
battery groups. No retrospective correlation analysis or re-selection is
performed using data from the test sets. Therefore, the integrity of the
evaluation is maintained, as the model training and testing phases
strictly adhere to the principle of using mutually exclusive data sources.

health indicators also influences the final estimation accuracy.
Furthermore, Table 7 also reveals that the representational ability of
the same HI varies significantly across different batteries. For example,
the DTC feature performs significantly better than the IC feature on
Cell5, whereas the opposite is observed for Cell3. However, the CVT
feature, extracted using the proposed strong correlation-based HI se­
lection method for battery groups, consistently achieves the best per­
formance across all batteries. Therefore, considering the correlation of
health indicators across all battery data is essential, as it greatly con­
tributes to enhancing the model's generalization and robustness.

4. Experimental results analysis
This study conducts a series of experiments to comprehensively
evaluate the performance and robustness of the proposed model. Three
types of experiments are carried out across three distinct datasets: SOH
estimation, RUL prediction, and ablation and complexity analysis. The
SOH experiments not only assess the predictive accuracy of the proposed
model but also serve to validate the effectiveness of the selected health
indicators, demonstrating their capability to capture critical degrada­
tion patterns. The RUL experiments further examine the model's ability
to generalize across different battery types and operating conditions,
providing a rigorous assessment of its prognostic reliability. Finally,
ablation studies and computational complexity analyses are conducted
to quantify the contributions of each module within the proposed ar­
chitecture and to evaluate its efficiency in terms of model size and
inference cost. Collectively, these experiments provide a thorough
validation of both the accuracy and practical applicability of the pro­
posed approach for lithium-ion battery health monitoring and remain­
ing useful life prediction.

4.2. Experiments II: Comparative study on SOH
This subsection first presents the SOH estimation performance using
individual features versus fused features within the same model, aiming
to validate the effectiveness of the optimized health indicator selection
methods. Subsequently, the selected health indicators are employed to
conduct model comparisons and evaluations across three battery data­
sets with different materials and operating conditions, fully demon­
strating the superiority, effectiveness, and generalization capability of
the proposed model.
In the SOH prediction experiments, the input health indicators are
selected and constructed according to the characteristics of the corre­
sponding battery datasets.
For the CALCE and NASA datasets, the SOH prediction experiments
adopt HI3 as the sole input feature, following the feature selection al­
gorithm described in Section 3.5. Compared with the Oxford dataset,
these two datasets exhibit more pronounced short-term local fluctua­
tions and larger sampling intervals, which limits the number of health
indicators that simultaneously satisfy the strict selection criteria defined
in Section 3.5. Under these conditions, HI3 remains the most stable and
informative indicator, effectively characterizing the long-term capacity
degradation trajectory and demonstrating strong correlation and
robustness across multiple cells. Moreover, in order to ensure the use of
a common health indicator across different datasets and enhance the
generalizability of the proposed method, HI3 is consistently selected for
the CALCE and NASA datasets.
For the Oxford dataset, a multidimensional health indicator set
consisting of HI3, HI4, and HI6 is employed as the model input. These
pre-selected HIs, identified using the same selection strategy, jointly
provide richer feature representations, which are beneficial for
capturing the more complex and smoother degradation behaviors
observed in the Oxford dataset.

4.1. Experiments I: Comparative study on different HIs
To validate the effectiveness of the proposed method for selecting
strongly correlated HIs applicable to all cells in a group, The first 30%
data of Cell1 is chosen as the training data. Only the strongly correlated
indicators of Cell1 (with absolute PCC and SCC values greater than 0.94)
are considered, without considering the correlation strength of health
indicators from other test batteries. To avoid redundancy, only one
feature is selected from each type of curve. The final selected health
indicators are HI1, HI4, HI6, and HI10, which are respectively abbre­
viated as the ‘IC’ feature, ‘CVT’ feature, ‘DTV’ feature, and ‘DTC’
feature. Additionally, all four HIs are fed into the model together for a
comprehensive performance evaluation, referred as ‘Fusion’. The SOH
estimation results of each selected HI using the proposed model are
shown in the Fig. 7.
Table 7 shows the MAE, RMSE, and MAPE metrics of different HIs for
this group of batteries using the proposed model, as well as the average
MAE and RMSE for multiple batteries on a single feature. The results
indicate that using the CVT feature consistently achieves high estimation
accuracy, with all experimental MAPE values below 1%, while the other
three individual features yield relatively average performance. Notably,
when all four HIs (Fusion) are used together as input, the final estima­
tion accuracy ranks second in terms of average RMSE and third in terms
of average MAE and MAPE, demonstrating that the overall correlation of

4.2.1. SOH estimation results on CS2 batteries
To verify the effectiveness of the proposed model across different
electrode materials and charge–discharge rates, additional experiments
were conducted on the CS2 batteries. In particular, the CS2–35 cell was
employed for model training and validation, where the first 30% of the
cycle data were used for training and the remaining 70% for validation.
This setup ensures that the model is evaluated on unseen data from the
same cell. Furthermore, to assess the generalization capability and
robustness of the model, the trained network was tested on three addi­
tional cells under identical operating conditions. This experimental
design enables comprehensive verification of both within-cell prediction
accuracy and cross-cell generalization performance.
As illustrated in Fig. 8, the proposed model achieves the closest fit to
the actual SOH values across the four CS2-series cells, which is of
considerable importance for practical applications. Moreover, the box­
plots in the upper-right corner reveal that the error distribution of the
proposed model lies closest to the zero axis, indicating its superior
predictive performance during the experiments. The detailed subfigures
further demonstrate the model's ability to effectively capture short-term
capacity fluctuations. These results highlight the strong predictive ac­
curacy and generalization capability of the proposed model.
Table 8 further summarizes the predictive performance of the

Table 6
Selected HIs with PCC and SCC of all cells.
HI3

HI4

HI6

Battery

γ

ρ

γ

ρ

γ

ρ

Cell1
Cell2
Cell3
Cell4
Cell5
Cell6
Cell7
Cell8

0.9999
0.9999
0.9999
0.9997
0.9998
0.9999
0.9999
0.9999

0.9999
0.9998
0.9999
1.0000
1.0000
1.0000
0.9999
0.9999

0.9999
0.9999
0.9999
0.9999
0.9998
0.9999
0.9999
0.9999

0.9998
0.9999
0.9999
0.9994
0.9999
1.0000
0.9999
0.9999

− 0.9783
− 0.9731
− 0.9556
− 0.9699
− 0.9739
− 0.9686
− 0.9753
− 0.9785

− 0.9779
− 0.9785
− 0.9593
− 0.9843
− 0.9788
− 0.9758
− 0.9880
− 0.9883

15

